Peter: Robotic cars are coming. We’ve seen
increased levels of automation in recent times
in regular passenger cars. We’ve seen systems
like backing alarms, automatic parking and
so on, adaptive cruise control. Google particularly,
recently, have got a really high profile in
this space, but I know that most of the major
auto manufacturers have got projects looking
at developing fully self-driving cars and
the number that gets bandied around a lot
is that this technology is going to be on
the roads by the year 2020.
Lots of people worry about the legal issues
around this. That if there is a self-driving
car and if it causes an accident, it kills
somebody, whose fault is that? But you’ve
got to I guess balance that against the fact
that human beings are terrible drivers. Every
year, a million people are killed, and maybe
a hundred million people are injured on the
road, by human drivers. So if we had robot
cars, and they perhaps do cause some injuries,
but perhaps 100th of the number of injuries
we have now, what does ethics have to say
about that? Is that a good thing or a bad
thing that robot cars would be accidentally
killing people? Not as many, but perhaps still
some?
Doug: Being over 50, I always look to the
past to answer the future and I’m thinking
all right, let’s think of the design of
cars in the past. So you and I were raised
at the time when there were no seatbelts.
When we were kids, we all jump in the back
seat, there were five of us and we’re back
there like hamsters or rabbits. We had a 1964
Chrysler Saratoga. The cars were designed
not for safety at all.
They were designed to look good…
Peter: And they did at that time.
Doug: Yeah, and they were wonderful. And they’re
designed to go fast. We had a 383 V8 and it
just flew. The mindset in those days was not
around efficiency because fuel consumption
wasn’t an issue because the oil was cheap.
Safety- cars weren’t designed for safety.
You got into an accident in those days, you
were scrambled inside the car because it wasn’t
design friendly. Mercedes-Benz, Volvo, you
know the story. Automobile started to design
around safety into the later ‘60s and into
the ‘70s. It became a major issue. Engines
were designed to drop-down, they had seatbelts…
Peter: Airbags…
Doug: Airbags came along and then the brakes.
It all changed as safety became a criteria.
Automobile deaths are the biggest killer in
most first world countries. They are a big
killer, there’s no doubt about it, in terms
of violent death.
Peter: Yeah.
Doug: So the argument would be that, in fact,
ethically are automobiles being manufactured
even today under the strictest sense of safety
to preserve human life? Because ethics would
argue that they should be, that you should
be designing this car, so that it’s the
safest car possible within sort of the economic
constraints. So if you argue from the past
to the future and look at this construct of
robotics making less death, making the road
safer, I would argue that it’s completely
ethically founded in terms of using robotics.
I have no problem with that at all.
Peter: So in a greater good sense, it’s
fantastic.
Doug: In a teleological sense, absolutely,
yeah.
Peter: But for the individual whose partner
was killed by a robotic vehicle, they’re
not going to be happy. But I guess they’re
not going to be happy if they’re killed
by a human-driven vehicle either.
Doug: Yeah, so again, what’s the difference?
You’re right. It becomes a case then of
law, who gets sued and how. Does it fall back
onto the car manufacturer to be sued in that
case rather than the fallibility of the individual who lose their license or get a jail term for causing that?
Peter: So then it becomes a legal issue and
no longer a moral issue?
Doug: That’s my belief, yes.
Peter: Okay, so the higher or the moral consideration
here is that we could dramatically reduce
the number of people killed on the roads and
that’s a good thing.
Doug: Absolutely, Peter. I believe that. Yeah.